## Chapter 6. Lesson 5. Pitching
###### tags: `Chapter 9`

In this lesson, we'll discuss how to effectively pitch your project to potential employees, customers and investors. This lesson is divided in three sub-models, how to pitch your project, pitch deck and etiquette. 

### How to pitch your project.
How to pitch your project. The process of talking about your project is called pitching, whether you are sharing your progress with a friend or presenting it to potential investors. Pitching is always selling as you want to sell the idea of project to future employees, customers and investors. Pitching is a true art, but you don't need to worry. It is an easy art to become good at. You just need to learn how to pitch your idea or project effectively.

### Pitch Deck
Most likely your pitch will be covering all the topics covered in your pitch deck, a presentation to support your pitch. So we will share best practices on how to build good enough deck to start your journey. There are many ways to build a pitch deck and we'll go over some essentials in the next part. Pitch deck. The most important thing you need to know and if you decide to remember a single thing from this lesson, this is the single thing you should take with you. Your pitch and pitch deck are never truly finished. They can and should be improved after each talk you have. The following structure of slides is a suggestion that you can adapt according to your project and industry. On the first slide, you generally want to grab attention with a startling fact or interesting story. Be appropriately different to get people excited and focused on you. On the second slide, you generally introduce yourself and explaining why people should believe in you. This may happen before you even open the deck. Present the team, highlighting who are you working with and for how long. De-risk as much as possible that it is not just you in a silo. Define the problem clearly. Outline your target audience early on so listeners can envision a persona from the beginning. Describe your solution in a plain English as if you are talking to a three-year-old. Demo whatever possible. Discuss your product lineup or the roadmap and the grand vision for the future. Explain the market, the number of people who could benefit, and why this is important right now. Show traction and validation through survey results, user interview quotes, signups, downloads, active customers, or other KPIs you're tracking. Even blogs and tweets count. Detail your go-to-market and customer acquisition strategies. Describe your business model, including how and when you'll make the money. Discuss the completion and your team once more to finish the presentation. Don't forget to include your contact information and to leave time and room for counterparty to ask questions.For more information on building your pitch deck, you can refer to resources like [this](https://www.decktopus.com/). 

### Etiquette
Etiquette. When approaching investors, it is essential to do your homework. Study their portfolio and learn about the person you are contacting. Investors are generally busy, so make your message clear and eye-catching. Ensure your deck is ready to be sent before you start the conversation. During the meeting, take notes to improve your pitch and deck. And remember, don't be afraid. Investors need projects as much as projects need the investment.

### Conclusion
To conclude, in this lesson, we've discussed how to effectively pitch your project, create a compelling pitch deck, and adhere to investor’s etiquette. By mastering these skills, you'll be better prepared to present your project within the TON blockchain venture ecosystem and secure the support you need to succeed.

